docs/jobs.rst, before:

Jobs
=====

All jobs have a unique name (job\_id), and all but invariant preserving
jobs encapsulate python callbacks to do their work.

There are four basic kinds of jobs:

 *  [Output generating jobs](). These are generally run in a fork of the
    cs, they might use multi cores (if you call an external pnon-python
    program), and they modify the outside world (create files, change
    databases, call the web).

    They do not modify the state of your program - neither on the mcp
    nor on the cs level.

 *  [Invariant preserving jobs](). These jobs are used to check that
    nothing changed. If it did, the downstream jobs need to be redone.
    Typical examples of what is checked are file modification time, file
    checksum, parameters, or changes to python functions.

    They are evaluated in the mcp and never 'ran' anywhere.

 *  [Compute slave modifying jobs](). These jobs load data into a
    compute slave that is then available (read-only) in all dependend
    output generating jobs (and it even only needs memory once thanks to
    linux forking behaviour).

    They are not run if there isn't an output job depending on them that
    needs to be done. They run single core per machine (since they must
    be run within the compute slave). They may run multiple times (on
    different machines). They modify compute slaves!

 *  [Job generating jobs](). They extend the job graph itself - either
    by creating new jobs depending on the data at hand (for example,
    create a graph for every line in a file generated by an output job),
    or by injecting further dependencies.

    They are executed in a compute slave (since they might well use data
    that was loaded by cs modifying jobs) and the jobs generated are
    transfered back to the mcp (so the mcp is still isolated from their
    execution function). **Note**: Job generating jobs are run each time
    the pipeline runs - otherwise we could not check whether the
    generated jobs have been done. That probably also means that their
    dependencies should be 'lightweight' in terms of runtime.

In addition, there are [compound jobs]() that combine jobs for
convienance.


Invariant preserving jobs
--------------------------

 * ParameterInvariant
   Encapsulate a tuple defining some parameters to another job. If the
   parameters change, dependend jobs are redone.
 * FileTimeInvariant
   Capture the file modification time of an input file.

 * FileChecksumInvariant
   Capture the file modification time, file size and the md5 sum of a file.
   If the size changes, invalidate dependands. If the time changes, check
   md5, if it changed, invalidate dependands. Otherwise, update internal
   file modification time.

 * FunctionInvariant
   Compare (slightly sanitized) byte code of arbitrary python functions to
   its last definition. If it changed: invalidate dependands.


Output generating jobs
-----------------------

 * FileGeneratingJob
   This job creates an output file.

   It get's rerun if the output file does not exist, if it is 0 byte in
   size, or if the job has been invalidated. Not creating the output file
   in its callback raises an exception.

   If the job raises an exception, the output file created so far will be
   removed. (optionally, if you pass rename\_broken = True when creating,
   the output filename get's renamed into outputfilename + '.broken')

   The job receives an implicit FunctionInvariant on its callback. This can
   be supressed by calling myjob.ignore\_code\_changes()

   The job\_id doubles up as the output filename.

 * MultiFileGeneratingJob
   Same as a [FileGeneratingJob](), just that multiple (defined) files are
   checked and produced.

 * TempFileGeneratingJob
   This job creates a file that directly dependand jobs might access. After
   those are through though, the file get's removed. It does not get
   removed if any directly dependand job dies (instead of finishing ok), so
   that it does not need to be redone later. It does get removed if the
   TempFileGeneratingJob breaks (except if you pass rename\_broken = True
   when construcing it).


Compute slave modifying jobs
-----------------------------

 * AttributeLoadingJob
   Load data (from wherever), and store it as attribute on an object. Only
   occurs if there is another Job depending on it that needs o be done.
   Might occur multiple times on different machines.

   The attribute disappears after all directly dependant jobs have
   been run, freeing memory.

 * DataLoadingJob
   Similar to an [AttributeLoadingJob](), but does not do anything about
   the data storage - that's your job.

   DataLoadingJobs don't directly require their prerequisites to be done -
   so chaining a bunch of them, and having a [FileGeneratingJob]() at the end
   either makes all of them run (given that the [FileGeneratingJob]() is
   not done) or none of them.

   On the plus side, the data loaded via this job does not get
   automatically 'del'ed once all dependend jobs have been done.


Job generating jobs
---------------------

 * DependencyInjectionJob

   This job injects further dependencies into jobs that already depends on
   it.

   An example: Say you want to extract the titles from a bunch of
   downloaded websites. But the websites are not defined when first
   creating jobs - you first have to download an overview page. So you
   write a job that takes all .html in a folder and combines their titles
   (Z). You also create a job that downloads the overview (A) . Then you
   write a DependencyInjectionJob C (upon wich Z depends on) that depends
   on A, creates a bunch of jobs (B1...Bn) that download the single
   websites, and you return them. Z now also depends on B1..Bn and since Z
   also depended on C, it could not have run before it had the additional
   dependencies injected.

   It is an error to add dependencies on a job that is not dependand on
   this DependencyInjectionJob.

   A DependencyInjectionJob has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]().

 * JobGeneratingJob

   This job generates new jobs that depend on the output of an earlier one.

   Example: You want to draw a graph for each of the member of your sales
   team. What members there are you of course only know after querying the
   database for them. You write a JobGeneratingJob that queries the
   database for a list of sales team members (or depends on some other job
   if the action is more expensive). For each sales team member it creates
   a [FileGeneratingJob]() that queries the database for this members
   figures and draws the graph. The FileGeneratingJobs now can run in
   parallel even on different machines...

   A JobGeneratingJob has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]().


Compound jobs
---------------

 * PlotJob

   This job wraps plotting with plotnine or pyggplot. It takes two functions: one
   calculates the dataframe for the plot, and that result is cached. The
   other one loads that dataframe and returns a pyggplot.Plot.
 
   Both have their own [FunctionInvariant](), so you can fiddle with the
   plot function without having the calculation part rerun.
 
   The calc function must return a pandas.DataFrame, the plot function
   a plotnine.ggplot or pyggplot.Plot
 
 * CachedJob

   A CachedJob is a combination of of a AttributeLoadingJob and a
   FileGeneratingJob. It has a single callback, that returns some
   hard-to-compute value, which is pickled to a file (jobid doubles as
   cache file name). The AttributeLoadingJob loads the data in question if
   necessary.
 
   The calc function does not get run if there are no dependencies.
 
   It also has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]() on it's calc function
   (supress just like a [FileGeneratingJob]() with ignore\_code\_changes())
 

Exceptions
-----------

pypipegraph has a small set of exceptions (all descending from
PyPipelineGraphError). 
  
 * RuntimeError get's thrown by pypipegraph.run
   if a job raised an exception, communication lines were broken etc 
 * JobContractError is stored in a job's .exception if the job's callback
   did not comply with it's requirements (e.g. a FileGeneratingJob did not
   actually create the file) 
 * CycleError: you have fabricated a cycle in
   your dependencies. 


Runtime
--------

While the pypipegraph is running, you can terminate it by typing 'abort' and pressing
enter. 'help<enter>' will present a you a list of commands you can issue.


Executing structure
-------------------------

You write a 'master control program' (mcp) that creates Jobs and at one
point, you hand over control to the pypipegraph. The mcp then talks to a
resource-coordinator (either a local instance that says 'take all of
this machine' or a network service that coordinates between multiple
unning pypipegraphs) and spawns one compute slave (cs) for each machine.

Now each compute slave receives a copy of all jobs (which are just
definitions, and therefore pretty small). One by one the mcp (talking to
the resource-coordinator) asks the cs to execute jobs (while talking to
the resource-coordinater to share resources with others), collects their
feedback, prunes the graph on errors and returns control to you once all
of them have been done (or failed ;) ).

The mcp knows (thanks to the resource coordinator) about the resources
available (number of cpu cores, memory) and doesn't overload the nodes
(by spawning more processes than there are cores or by spawning too many
memory hungry jobs at once).


Generated Files
---------------------

Besides your output files, a pipegraph creates some auxillary files:
  * ./.pypipegraph\_status\_robust - stores the invariant data of all jobs
  * ./logs/ppg\_run.txt - the chattery debug output of every decision the
    pipegraph makes (only if logs exists). All logging is also send to
    localhost 5005, and you can listen with util/log\_listener.py
  * ./logs/ppg\_errors.txt - a log of all failed jobs and their
    exception/stdout/stderr (only if logs exists and the file is writable)
  * ./logs/ppg\_graph.txt - a dump of the connected graph structure
    (which job depends on which) (only if logs exists)


Notes
---------

 *  A pipegraph and it's jobs can only be run once (but you can create
    multiple pipegraphs serially).
 *  It is an error to create jobs before new\_pipegraph() has been
    called.
 *  Jobs magically associated with the currently existing pipegraph.
 *  Invariant status is kept in a magic .pypipegraph\_status file.
 *  Jobs are singletonized on their id (within the existance of one
    pipegraph). Little harm is done in defining a job multiple times.
 *  Adding jobs gives you an iterable of jobs (which depends\_on also
    takes). Adding a job and an iterable also gives you an iterable. So
    does adding an iterable and a job or an iterable and an iterable...
 *  Executing jobs (all [Output jobs]()) have resource attributes:
    cores\_needed (default 1, -1 means 'all you can get'),
    memory\_needed (default = -1, means don't worry about it, just start
    one per core, assume memory / cores. If you specify something above
    memory/core it's treated as if you need (your\_memory\_specification
    / (memory/core)) cores). memory\_needed is in bytes!
 *  Beware of passing instance functions to FunctionInvariants - if the
    job creation code is done again for a different instance, it will
    raise an exception, because the bound function from before is not
    the same function you pass in now. Pass in class.function instead of
    self.function
 *  pypipegraph is developed and tested on Ubuntu. It will not work
    reasonably on Windows - it's job model makes heavy use of fork() and
    windows process creating does not implicitly copy-on-write the
    current process' memory contents.


Python function gotchas
----------------------------
Please keep in mind that in python functions by default bind to the name
of variables in their scope, no to their values. This means that :

python::

    for filename in ('A', 'B', 'C'):
       def shu():
           write_to_file(filename=filename, text='hello world')
       job = pypipegraph.FileGeneratingJob(i, shu)

will not do what you want - you'll end up with three jobs, all writing
to the same file (and the appropriate JobContractExceptions because two
of them did not create their output files). What you need to do is
rebind the variable:

python::

    for filename in ('A', 'B', 'C'):
       def shu(filename=filename):  #that's the magic line. Also works for lambdas
           write_to_file(filename=filename, text='hello world')
       job = pypipegraph.FileGeneratingJob(i, shu)

Commit message:

removed the word slave from this source code, as if that was helping anybody

docs/jobs.rst, after:

Jobs
=====

All jobs have a unique name (job\_id), and all but invariant preserving
jobs encapsulate python callbacks to do their work.

There are four basic kinds of jobs:

 *  [Output generating jobs](). These are generally run in a fork of the
    worker, they might use multi cores (if you call an external pnon-python
    program), and they modify the outside world (create files, change
    databases, call the web).

    They do not modify the state of your program - neither on the mcp
    nor on the worker level.

 *  [Invariant preserving jobs](). These jobs are used to check that
    nothing changed. If it did, the downstream jobs need to be redone.
    Typical examples of what is checked are file modification time, file
    checksum, parameters, or changes to python functions.

    They are evaluated in the mcp and never 'ran' anywhere.

 *  [Compute worker modifying jobs](). These jobs load data into a
    compute worker that is then available (read-only) in all dependend
    output generating jobs (and it even only needs memory once thanks to
    linux forking behaviour).

    They are not run if there isn't an output job depending on them that
    needs to be done. They run single core per machine (since they must
    be run within the compute worker). They may run multiple times (on
    different machines). They modify compute workers!

 *  [Job generating jobs](). They extend the job graph itself - either
    by creating new jobs depending on the data at hand (for example,
    create a graph for every line in a file generated by an output job),
    or by injecting further dependencies.

    They are executed in a compute worker (since they might well use data
    that was loaded by worker modifying jobs) and the jobs generated are
    transfered back to the mcp (so the mcp is still isolated from their
    execution function). **Note**: Job generating jobs are run each time
    the pipeline runs - otherwise we could not check whether the
    generated jobs have been done. That probably also means that their
    dependencies should be 'lightweight' in terms of runtime.

In addition, there are [compound jobs]() that combine jobs for
convienance.


Invariant preserving jobs
--------------------------

 * ParameterInvariant
   Encapsulate a tuple defining some parameters to another job. If the
   parameters change, dependend jobs are redone.
 * FileTimeInvariant
   Capture the file modification time of an input file.

 * FileChecksumInvariant
   Capture the file modification time, file size and the md5 sum of a file.
   If the size changes, invalidate dependands. If the time changes, check
   md5, if it changed, invalidate dependands. Otherwise, update internal
   file modification time.

 * FunctionInvariant
   Compare (slightly sanitized) byte code of arbitrary python functions to
   its last definition. If it changed: invalidate dependands.


Output generating jobs
-----------------------

 * FileGeneratingJob
   This job creates an output file.

   It get's rerun if the output file does not exist, if it is 0 byte in
   size, or if the job has been invalidated. Not creating the output file
   in its callback raises an exception.

   If the job raises an exception, the output file created so far will be
   removed. (optionally, if you pass rename\_broken = True when creating,
   the output filename get's renamed into outputfilename + '.broken')

   The job receives an implicit FunctionInvariant on its callback. This can
   be supressed by calling myjob.ignore\_code\_changes()

   The job\_id doubles up as the output filename.

 * MultiFileGeneratingJob
   Same as a [FileGeneratingJob](), just that multiple (defined) files are
   checked and produced.

 * TempFileGeneratingJob
   This job creates a file that directly dependand jobs might access. After
   those are through though, the file get's removed. It does not get
   removed if any directly dependand job dies (instead of finishing ok), so
   that it does not need to be redone later. It does get removed if the
   TempFileGeneratingJob breaks (except if you pass rename\_broken = True
   when construcing it).


Compute worker modifying jobs
-----------------------------

 * AttributeLoadingJob
   Load data (from wherever), and store it as attribute on an object. Only
   occurs if there is another Job depending on it that needs o be done.
   Might occur multiple times on different machines.

   The attribute disappears after all directly dependant jobs have
   been run, freeing memory.

 * DataLoadingJob
   Similar to an [AttributeLoadingJob](), but does not do anything about
   the data storage - that's your job.

   DataLoadingJobs don't directly require their prerequisites to be done -
   so chaining a bunch of them, and having a [FileGeneratingJob]() at the end
   either makes all of them run (given that the [FileGeneratingJob]() is
   not done) or none of them.

   On the plus side, the data loaded via this job does not get
   automatically 'del'ed once all dependend jobs have been done.


Job generating jobs
---------------------

 * DependencyInjectionJob

   This job injects further dependencies into jobs that already depends on
   it.

   An example: Say you want to extract the titles from a bunch of
   downloaded websites. But the websites are not defined when first
   creating jobs - you first have to download an overview page. So you
   write a job that takes all .html in a folder and combines their titles
   (Z). You also create a job that downloads the overview (A) . Then you
   write a DependencyInjectionJob C (upon wich Z depends on) that depends
   on A, creates a bunch of jobs (B1...Bn) that download the single
   websites, and you return them. Z now also depends on B1..Bn and since Z
   also depended on C, it could not have run before it had the additional
   dependencies injected.

   It is an error to add dependencies on a job that is not dependand on
   this DependencyInjectionJob.

   A DependencyInjectionJob has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]().

 * JobGeneratingJob

   This job generates new jobs that depend on the output of an earlier one.

   Example: You want to draw a graph for each of the member of your sales
   team. What members there are you of course only know after querying the
   database for them. You write a JobGeneratingJob that queries the
   database for a list of sales team members (or depends on some other job
   if the action is more expensive). For each sales team member it creates
   a [FileGeneratingJob]() that queries the database for this members
   figures and draws the graph. The FileGeneratingJobs now can run in
   parallel even on different machines...

   A JobGeneratingJob has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]().


Compound jobs
---------------

 * PlotJob

   This job wraps plotting with plotnine or pyggplot. It takes two functions: one
   calculates the dataframe for the plot, and that result is cached. The
   other one loads that dataframe and returns a pyggplot.Plot.
 
   Both have their own [FunctionInvariant](), so you can fiddle with the
   plot function without having the calculation part rerun.
 
   The calc function must return a pandas.DataFrame, the plot function
   a plotnine.ggplot or pyggplot.Plot
 
 * CachedJob

   A CachedJob is a combination of of a AttributeLoadingJob and a
   FileGeneratingJob. It has a single callback, that returns some
   hard-to-compute value, which is pickled to a file (jobid doubles as
   cache file name). The AttributeLoadingJob loads the data in question if
   necessary.
 
   The calc function does not get run if there are no dependencies.
 
   It also has an implicit [FunctionInvariant]() on it's calc function
   (supress just like a [FileGeneratingJob]() with ignore\_code\_changes())
 

Exceptions
-----------

pypipegraph has a small set of exceptions (all descending from
PyPipelineGraphError). 
  
 * RuntimeError get's thrown by pypipegraph.run
   if a job raised an exception, communication lines were broken etc 
 * JobContractError is stored in a job's .exception if the job's callback
   did not comply with it's requirements (e.g. a FileGeneratingJob did not
   actually create the file) 
 * CycleError: you have fabricated a cycle in
   your dependencies. 


Runtime
--------

While the pypipegraph is running, you can terminate it by typing 'abort' and pressing
enter. 'help<enter>' will present a you a list of commands you can issue.


Executing structure
-------------------------

You write a 'master control program' (mcp) that creates Jobs and at one
point, you hand over control to the pypipegraph. The mcp then talks to a
resource-coordinator (either a local instance that says 'take all of
this machine' or a network service that coordinates between multiple
unning pypipegraphs) and spawns one compute worker  for each machine.

Now each compute worker receives a copy of all jobs (which are just
definitions, and therefore pretty small). One by one the mcp (talking to
the resource-coordinator) asks the worker to execute jobs (while talking to
the resource-coordinater to share resources with others), collects their
feedback, prunes the graph on errors and returns control to you once all
of them have been done (or failed ;) ).

The mcp knows (thanks to the resource coordinator) about the resources
available (number of cpu cores, memory) and doesn't overload the nodes
(by spawning more processes than there are cores or by spawning too many
memory hungry jobs at once).


Generated Files
---------------------

Besides your output files, a pipegraph creates some auxillary files:
  * ./.pypipegraph\_status\_robust - stores the invariant data of all jobs
  * ./logs/ppg\_run.txt - the chattery debug output of every decision the
    pipegraph makes (only if logs exists). All logging is also send to
    localhost 5005, and you can listen with util/log\_listener.py
  * ./logs/ppg\_errors.txt - a log of all failed jobs and their
    exception/stdout/stderr (only if logs exists and the file is writable)
  * ./logs/ppg\_graph.txt - a dump of the connected graph structure
    (which job depends on which) (only if logs exists)


Notes
---------

 *  A pipegraph and it's jobs can only be run once (but you can create
    multiple pipegraphs serially).
 *  It is an error to create jobs before new\_pipegraph() has been
    called.
 *  Jobs magically associated with the currently existing pipegraph.
 *  Invariant status is kept in a magic .pypipegraph\_status file.
 *  Jobs are singletonized on their id (within the existance of one
    pipegraph). Little harm is done in defining a job multiple times.
 *  Adding jobs gives you an iterable of jobs (which depends\_on also
    takes). Adding a job and an iterable also gives you an iterable. So
    does adding an iterable and a job or an iterable and an iterable...
 *  Executing jobs (all [Output jobs]()) have resource attributes:
    cores\_needed (default 1, -1 means 'all you can get'),
    memory\_needed (default = -1, means don't worry about it, just start
    one per core, assume memory / cores. If you specify something above
    memory/core it's treated as if you need (your\_memory\_specification
    / (memory/core)) cores). memory\_needed is in bytes!
 *  Beware of passing instance functions to FunctionInvariants - if the
    job creation code is done again for a different instance, it will
    raise an exception, because the bound function from before is not
    the same function you pass in now. Pass in class.function instead of
    self.function
 *  pypipegraph is developed and tested on Ubuntu. It will not work
    reasonably on Windows - it's job model makes heavy use of fork() and
    windows process creating does not implicitly copy-on-write the
    current process' memory contents.


Python function gotchas
----------------------------
Please keep in mind that in python functions by default bind to the name
of variables in their scope, no to their values. This means that :

python::

    for filename in ('A', 'B', 'C'):
       def shu():
           write_to_file(filename=filename, text='hello world')
       job = pypipegraph.FileGeneratingJob(i, shu)

will not do what you want - you'll end up with three jobs, all writing
to the same file (and the appropriate JobContractExceptions because two
of them did not create their output files). What you need to do is
rebind the variable:

python::

    for filename in ('A', 'B', 'C'):
       def shu(filename=filename):  #that's the magic line. Also works for lambdas
           write_to_file(filename=filename, text='hello world')
       job = pypipegraph.FileGeneratingJob(i, shu)
